[doc][llm] Add custom vLLM model guide for Ray Serve LLM (#64594)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/serve/llm/user-guides/custom-vllm.md

(custom-vllm-guide)=
# Custom vLLM models

> Ray Serve LLM serves any architecture that vLLM supports. When your model isn't a [built-in vLLM architecture](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/models/supported_models.html), you add it with a [vLLM plugin](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/design/plugin_system.html): a custom package that registers the architecture in vLLM's model registry without patching vLLM. Ray Serve LLM then serves it through the same OpenAI-compatible API as any other model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides an example of serving a custom vLLM model with Ray Serve LLM.

The example model is a custom reward model composed of Qwen3-0.6B with its vocabulary LM head replaced by a scalar reward head. The model reuses vLLM's Qwen3 backbone, scores the last token, and returns the reward through vLLM's `/classify` endpoint.

## How does Ray Serve LLM support custom vLLM models?

Ray Serve LLM serves any architecture that vLLM supports. When your model isn't a [built-in vLLM architecture](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/models/supported_models.html), you add it with a [vLLM plugin](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/design/plugin_system.html): a custom package that registers the architecture in vLLM's model registry without patching vLLM. Ray Serve LLM then serves it through the same OpenAI-compatible API as any other model.
```

> This guide serves a reward model: Qwen3-0.6B with its vocabulary LM head replaced by a scalar reward head. The model reuses vLLM's Qwen3 backbone, scores the last token, and returns the reward through vLLM's `/classify` endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Prerequisites

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install Ray with the LLM extra:

```bash
```

pip install "ray[llm]"
```

## Write the plugin

> The plugin is an installable Python package. Here's an example layout:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compose the plugin as an installable Python package. The following is an example layout:
```

```text
qwen3-reward-plugin/          # project directory -- run `pip install .` here
├── setup.py                  # packaging metadata and the vLLM entry point
└── qwen3_reward_plugin/      # the importable package
    ├── __init__.py           # register(): adds the architecture to vLLM's model registry
    ├── qwen3_rm.py           # Qwen3CustomRewardModel: the model class
    └── serve_hook.py         # RewardModelServer: registers the plugin in the Ray Serve LLM replica
```

### Model class

> Subclass vLLM's `Qwen3ForCausalLM` to reuse its backbone, then attach the reward head and a last-token classification pooler. See the full model class [here](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/tree/master/doc/source/llm/doc_code/serve/custom_vllm/qwen3_reward_plugin/qwen3_rm.py).

Reviewer: I'm not a SME here, but:

- "Subclass" as a verb is awkward.
- I'm not clear why there's not a code example here?

If the code is in the following example block, I would:
- Add a clear code comment to the line where this happens.
- Move the description and link to the following (or previous? Unclear) section.

Author: thanks @dstrodtman!
- subclass is actually quite common as a verb
- once this PR is merged, the code example will show up in github and the doc points to that

### Register the architecture

vLLM calls `register()` in every process it starts, the driver, the engine core, and each rank worker, through vLLM's `load_general_plugins()`.

```{literalinclude} ../../../llm/doc_code/serve/custom_vllm/qwen3_reward_plugin/__init__.py
:language: python
:start-after: __register_start__
:end-before: __register_end__
```

### Package it

> Declare the `vllm.general_plugins` entry point in `setup.py`. Installing the package is what makes vLLM discover and run `register()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Declare the `vllm.general_plugins` entry point in `setup.py`. vLLM discovers the package and runs `register()` when the package installs.
```

I think? Or is it "discover"ing the `register()`? Lack of object makes the sentence awkward.

```{literalinclude} ../../../llm/doc_code/serve/custom_vllm/setup.py
:language: python
:start-after: __setup_start__
:end-before: __setup_end__
```

Install the plugin into the image your Ray cluster runs, alongside vLLM, so every node and every vLLM engine and worker process can discover it:

```bash
pip install .  # from the plugin project directory
```

## Deploy the model

> 

Reviewer: Add a single line description of the section, and then I think break this into 2-3 sections?

It looks like lines 59-74 are still config, the tabs in 78-100 are the actual deploy.

Author: make sense, done in https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/64594/commits/615b2ba3dbb7e1096e97d88f6c87bbeeb2f2b898

```{literalinclude} ../../../llm/doc_code/serve/custom_vllm/qwen3_reward_plugin/serve_hook.py
:language: python
:start-after: __serve_hook_start__
:end-before: __serve_hook_end__
```

Serve with {doc}`direct streaming <direct-streaming>` so vLLM's native `/classify` route is exposed. Export both environment variables before starting Serve:

```bash
export RAY_SERVE_ENABLE_HA_PROXY=1
export RAY_SERVE_LLM_ENABLE_DIRECT_STREAMING=1
```

Then deploy with the Python API or an equivalent YAML config:

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Python
:sync: python

```{literalinclude} ../../../llm/doc_code/serve/custom_vllm/custom_vllm_example.py
:language: python
:start-after: __custom_vllm_example_start__
:end-before: __custom_vllm_example_end__
```

Save this as `app.py` and run it to deploy.
:::

:::{tab-item} YAML
:sync: yaml

```{literalinclude} ../../../llm/doc_code/serve/custom_vllm/custom_vllm_config.yaml
:language: yaml
```

Deploy it with `serve run custom_vllm_config.yaml`.
:::

::::

## Query the model

> Send text to the `/classify` endpoint and read the scalar reward from `data[0].probs[0]`. Until you provide trained reward-head weights (see the next section), this value is arbitrary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command to verify your model is serving. This query sends text to the `/classify` endpoint and reads the scalar reward from `data[0].probs[0]`. Until you provide trained reward-head weights (see the next section), this value is arbitrary.
```
